Abstracts from 80 on or out for binding so I didn't get to read what you've done in
your papers but what is your research now that you're writing about?
Okay, well I'm looking at the way bacteria sense chemical changes in their environment.
Tape is rolling.
How did you get interested in science fiction?
Well I've always read it I guess ever since I was young I've read a great deal of many
different things and in particular in high school I just read a lot of it on timeline
and then begin later and so on and I also used to write a great deal just for my own
interest and being interested in the sciences as well it was sort of a good combination.
So you started writing at a very early age then?
Oh yes, yes I suppose when I was around six or seven actually just for my own pleasure
mostly but then actually once I left college was when I first had the idea that gee I bet
I could write a novel so I sat down and wrote it one summer actually just before I went
to grad school.
Why did you decide to write a novel first instead of short stories?
Well I had written short stories actually before that so I just never I'd never published
any of them but I guess at this time what happened was that I had ideas that were more
complex and that I wanted to use to develop characters more than you could in a short
story and so I ended up writing a novel and then I just sent it off to a publisher at
that time and actually that particular novel has not been published but I did it was useful
in that it caught the attention of a publisher they took nearly a year to get around to reading
it but once they did they sent it back and said gee this is good why don't you maybe
rewrite it a little bit.
The only thing was by that time I had already started my next novel still forms on Foxfield.
In the back of still forms on Foxfield it says that you're a member of the New Haven Science
Fiction Writer's Workshop.
Did this help you quite a bit or did you had you already submitted your novel by the time
you joined this group or did you join the group and then get inspired to do some sending
off?
Oh I submitted it I'd written it and sent it off long before I met them actually I
didn't meet them until after my first novel was accepted and at that time I did I was
able to use a lot of their comments for some revision and improvement of the novel as it
had been written but I'd say I did most of my original writing on my own once I've met
them I actually found them very useful in the publications aspect because they helped
show me what you have to do to get along with the publishers and what to look out for in
the contracts and so on.
So you did write the novel before you started to graduate school?
Excuse me.
The second one actually I was in graduate school.
Let me get you to start I'm getting choked up here I swallowed something.
The little button in the center.
Okay.
I'm sorry I got all choked up.
Okay I repeat the question you said that you had written the novel before you okay you
wrote a novel before graduate school and then you wrote I take it still forms on Foxfield
during graduate school?
That's right I guess once I had written the first one I'd sort of gotten into a habit
which I couldn't break even though I was in graduate school and had a lot of other things
to do and I really don't I really can't tell you how I managed to do it but somehow it
just sort of ended up getting written and then I sent it on.
I would have to say that I find that the creative enterprises really sort of helped to build
on each other both science and science fiction.
You know science fiction provides a lot of imaginative ways of looking at things.
You have to think in wildly creative ways to write science fiction and that's also a
helpful way of thinking when you go back to your real life scientific problems and want
to figure out how experiments might be working and so on.
So the two actually were very useful to be doing together in a way.
Okay so you did write it during graduate school one would assume probably not during the first
two years you didn't do much is that true or did you write it pretty much through?
I was doing it like a second and third year.
Along on weekends late nights it's what I used to do on Saturday nights instead of going
to wild parties I guess.
So it's a good way to let off steam you're saying.
Oh yeah that's right.
Okay one of the reasons I wanted to talk to you is because you're a practicing hard scientist
who writes science fiction do you among all the time among all the many things that you
have to do writing and doing experiments and so forth do you have time to read very much
science fiction now?
I have some time.
I confess that I find myself reading a lot more of other things other than science fiction
basically because I've always enjoyed reading such a wide range of things and while science
fiction is very interesting there's so much else out there that's interesting that I find
I end up of the time that I have to read I end up reading only a couple books occasionally
of actual science fiction but also I would stress that it's extremely important for a
science fiction writer to read widely of other things from history to classical novels as
well as science of course because that's what breeds new life into science fiction is getting
ideas from other sources that other science fiction writers haven't used before.
For example using Quakers in my fiction writing about a Quaker community that was something
that hadn't been done before and that I think sort of interested a lot of people.
Okay that makes me need to skip down okay.
Okay let me start over.
The other books that you read do you find that they influence your style or obviously
they give you new ideas but what about the style, the characterization, the format, that
sort of thing?
Do you pick up anything new from reading outside the genre?
Oh definitely I would say that whenever I read something now I almost automatically
look into it and try to figure out how the writer succeeds in doing certain things and
you can never really imitate another author I found but you can at least get ideas and
clues as to the basic principles of how things work.
One writer that particularly interests me is Solzhenitsyn for instance.
That's an example of a writer who writes about science and scientists within the first circle
yet can also describe human feelings in ways that make you come alive for many different
readers and I try to look at the ways in which this is done.
Okay you said as a child you were interested in science, you read science fiction, you
still do.
What's your impression of the science and science fiction?
Let's not say something like double E Smith but some of the more modern stuff.
Do you read it for the science content or just more or less let it go by and are after
the ways people react or what do you have your eye on when you read science fiction?
What I have my eye on really is the interaction between science and people and that's the
one thing that I think is the sign of an outstanding writer is the one who can really show how
science operates in real life not how we would like it to operate in a fantasy life.
I think Heinlein is of course the ideal example of that.
In most of the good Heinlein stories he will take a look at technology and get show the human
perspectives on it and show how ordinary people's lives are affected.
Let's see I'm just trying to think if I can, if I come up with a concrete example later
or maybe I'll bring that up.
Have you read Timescape?
Oh gosh that was one that I started and really didn't have time to get into.
That was, that did seem to me to be, I think that's one of the best recent examples of it.
As I say I have so little time to get into these things but I remember in what I did
read of it that's the sort of books that I'm talking about where it shows scientists at
work and how they deal with problems in society as well as in their everyday life.
It was interesting to see how the scientist actually was at home in his laboratory and
the way that book could show scientists as people working as well as solving scientific problems.
This is an aside but do finish it, it's really good.
And I had similar feelings about it.
I was just curious that from what you were saying that would seem to fit your category most especially.
Yeah I think it would.
Unfortunately there are relatively few authors like that now who are really doing that.
There seems to be a much greater trend toward fantasy in what is published.
I think for example of Silverberg who is probably writing very good fantasy now but I always, well I like his science fiction when that's what he was writing.
The Man in the Maze for instance.
That was a book that I was very impressed with when I was in high school as showing a man was essentially isolated from the world of technology and had to face a real crisis in that way.
That's also one aspect in which religion fits into science fiction is that both religion and science fiction often address very similar questions about the universe.
They address, perhaps they treat the question in different ways but they ask how the universe is put together, what it's here for and where are we going in it.
And I find it often very interesting to compare the ways in which religious and scientific viewpoints tackle these questions because that so often happens in our society today too.
You have led me into the next area of questioning.
You mentioned while ago that you are a Quaker. That's discussed in the back of Still Forms on Foxfield. It's part of the book which we'll talk about in a minute.
Can you give me a quick run over for people including myself who are not really that familiar with Quakerism? Is that the proper reference and way to refer to it?
Basically what are the tenets?
Okay, the Quakers believe that each individual person has a very private and unique way of access to divine truth.
And this is absolute. Everyone has at least some way of reaching the divine truth in their own way and that you can't say that anyone necessarily has a better way than another person.
So the result is that Quakers don't generally have ministers. That is at least the original form of Quakers. Some Quaker meetings do today.
But the original Quakers had no ministers. They had unprogrammed meetings. In an unprogrammed meeting what you do is you worship in silence.
And every once in a while someone will be moved to speak by having a sort of revelation of a little bit of divine truth.
And this is the way the worship is carried out. And because of this real stress on the equality and the equivalence of everyone having some sort of access to truth,
it is also believed that there must be absolute democracy. Pacifism is one of the tenets. Since everyone has some sort of access to the truth, it's not right to break that line by killing someone.
Religion is basically Christian. It developed during the Protestant Reformation. It was one of the Protestant branches.
But at the same time it has become very universal as it has developed. And Quakers today see great affinity with other somewhat universalist religions such as Buddhism, for example.
And I made that parallel in my book also. And it is also a religion which scientists often find congenial because of the emphasis on the experience of the individual.
In science you test the universe by making experiments. Quakers test the spiritual universe by meditation and an inward seeking of truth. An almost inward type of experiment.
Still forms on Foxfield, I take it as the first appearance of Quakerism in science fiction.
There have been a number of great religious works in science fiction so far. A canicle for a libel which comes to mind. A case of conscience. Some people would say C.S. Lewis, I particularly enjoyed Farmer's Night of Light.
Do you think that religion has been treated fairly in science fiction? We talked about the science, but what about the religion in science fiction?
I'm disappointed that it hasn't been treated more. I think that it has been, where it has been treated, it's often been treated very well. And I think you mentioned some examples of that.
The high line, stranger in a strange land is a very controversial treatment of it. But in a way it made people think about the issues. And that was good.
What disappoints me more is that often writers seem to create universes in which religion does not exist at all. You see, I think you don't necessarily have to write a book about religion.
It seems almost dishonest to write about a world where it doesn't exist because it's such a prevalent part of life. And often it's prevalent in ways that you simply don't realize.
For example, I'm a scientist. My father is a scientist. And yet when I was little I learned about Adam and Eve before I learned about evolution. Simply because it's such a basic part of the culture.
And a lot of us often don't realize how basic it is and how we revert to it in times of crisis, such as a death in the family, things like that.
And in science fiction, very often people are portrayed in the far future with the idea that simply religion has died out and there's no more need for it anymore.
Whereas I find that to be an unrealistic portrayal. It seems to me that there always will be people who will need religion in that itself. It's a basic part of the human experience and that science is never going to completely replace that for people.
Okay. Still forms on Foxfield. That was the title of your novel so far. I shouldn't say that the one novel that has come out. Was that your title? And from whence did it come?
Okay. It was my title. And what it came from was, okay, Foxfield is the name of the planet that was named after the Quaker settled the planet and they named it after George Fox, who was the founder of the Quaker religion.
Still forms is a phrase that comes from a poem by Whittier, John Greenleaf Whittier, who was a Quaker. And he wrote a poem which described the experience of being in a Quaker meeting and he spoke of the still forms on either side that somehow read a special light.
And the still forms refers to the still forms of the people who were around him in the Quaker meeting. It's a very curious experience, the first time you're in a Quaker meeting, to be in a room where everyone is just totally silent and yet you hear the breath of people as they're breathing.
And then occasionally someone will be so moved to speak amidst that silence. And I guess I was trying to somehow capture the essence of what that experience could be. And yet at the same time show that it's taking place on a very alien world in a very far away place.
Okay, the book, which if one were picking up with any previous knowledge one would assume it was probably a fairly so-called soft science book. And yet as it turns out it's quite a hard science book and it also has good characterization.
And generally those two terms, not always, Benford comes to mind, but those two terms are mutually exclusive. Did you try to put a lot more effort into the science or into the characterizations or did it just kind of flow and you didn't really think about that?
I would say I tried to balance it as much as possible. I would suppose that in my own life I'm so interested both in science and in people and how they work as people. That it came natural to me to do it that way.
And I would write about the scientific ideas and the people and always what interests me is the interaction between the two. And so that was basically what came out of it.
Again I think the book is quite an education for those not acquainted with Quakerism because the people were very real people. They have their problems and their passions and they seem like real people. And I think the stereotypical Quaker is not that real.
One thing that really interested me in the book were your aliens. The commensals with the fractions and the one and the fractions using gas chromatography and NMR to detect various chemicals.
Did you conceive of the story and then the aliens or are the aliens something that have been lurking in your mind for a long time and you got to include them? How did they evolve?
I suppose actually the aliens were one of the earlier elements of the story. They sort of grew out of various experiences that I had in science actually.
Because as I mentioned to you before we started the show, in my scientific work I've studied chemical communication among bacteria.
And it was sort of of interesting to me supposing you could have an alien intelligence that would communicate chemically through things like pheromones almost. How would this work? Would it be possible?
And I tried to think what kind of creatures these might be and how they might work in different ways than our usual vertebrates, mammals, humans and so on.
And so it occurred to me they might have developed from plants for instance. They might use something akin to plant hormones.
So I guessed that those were around quite a while and then I also was getting much interested into Quakerism I guess that is slightly later date.
And the two things finally meshed together and that was really the key to the book was when I was able to combine those two ideas.
The idea of the aliens and the Quakers and how they would interact and at that point that's when it became possible to move ahead with the book.
I want to ask you now speaking as one familiar with biochemistry and so forth what your feelings on the possibility of aliens on other planets as far as carbon based something like DNA, genetic code that sort of thing.
How general do you think our type of life would be or how special is it? Just as kind of an educated guess.
Well of course everybody has their own opinion on that. My own guess would be that if there's one planet that has life and intelligent life there's probably others.
It seems hard for me to imagine that out of the entire universe there would be only one planet on which life had evolved.
I think the more interesting question in fact is given that compelling argument that there must be others out there why is it that we haven't heard from them?
That's really what the question that worries me more. Why is it that we haven't heard from them? After all we're intelligent and we question about other beings and send radio signals and so on.
And I would hope the reason is not that these other intelligences evolve and then destroy themselves because of their technology evolving along with them.
I would hope that's not the reason but I would say that's my answer to your question.
Do you think intelligence is as common as life? That's my particular problem is just that life I can handle with intelligence would seem to me to be something very special but I know there are other opinions.
Well I would say that it's quite possible that there are many many planets that have perhaps lower forms of life. And then perhaps one out of ten of those planets would have slightly more complex forms.
Perhaps they'd have an environment that would make possible a wider range of forms. And then perhaps one out of a hundred of those would have a range approaching ours.
And then perhaps one out of a great number of those would have intelligent life.
I guess that's how I would see it. Because I would agree with you that there's a big difference between being able to support a few microbes here and there and being able to support an entire range of things like ours.
But then on the other hand perhaps there may be planets which can support even a greater range than that of ours. Although I admit that's hard to imagine.
Let's look a little bit in your future. I realize you're just starting or just leaving academia and going out.
But what do you perceive as your career based on your graduate school studies and then your writing? How are you going to juggle the two acts? Do you plan to continue doing both or are you just going to see what happens?
Well I think for the immediate future I'll try to do both definitely. I couldn't see stopping one or the other. I guess I'm hooked on them both. I'll be going on to do post-doctoral work in medical research.
In fact I plan to study white blood cells and chemical communication among white blood cells which is something a little bit related to that study in bacteria.
So that's what I plan to be studying in science and I'd like to get into medical research as much as possible.
But I think that I'll continue to manage writing here and there along with that just as I have in grad school.
Where do you see science fiction going in terms of science and religion? Again this is an opinion but do you think those treat science and religion more realistically or is fantasy going to take over or what?
Well I think it really depends on which individual writers come out and are outstanding. It's so hard to predict trends in literature because you just never know who is going to come out and do something really fabulous.
For instance without Russell Lilligan what would science fiction have been? It's hard to answer that question.
I would hope to see more interest in the subject. It may be that with the country as a whole now since there is a lot more turmoil about religious beliefs
that may inspire more treatment of the question in science fiction. For instance now you have the whole creationist debate.
The creationists who claim that science and evolution are nothing more than a religion and therefore creationism should get equal time with religion.
That has inspired other religious people to come out and say oh no that's hogwash. Religion can have a different purpose and coexist with science.
You're seeing this kind of debate more and that may inspire a lot of interest.
Unfortunately that seems to me that that will inspire a lot of negative literature. Science fiction will become very negative as far as religion goes.
Looking at it as something trying to throw us back in the dark ages. I guess that and the Ayatollah combined. But that's just my opinion.
Well that's very possible and it certainly won't happen if I can do anything about it. As I said that is a problem.
But at the same time I'm seeing members of other religions beginning to stand up for the other side of things.
At the same time there's a great deal of interest in religion because people are finding out that life without religion sometimes
it leaves a sort of a hole in their lives and they're looking for something to replace that. And the response to that feeling can be very negative.
For instance you have people joining the Mooney cult. And I would hope that we'll come up with some alternative to that.
How do your peers, your fellow students, your professors that know you have written them, that you've published a novel. How do they treat that or treat you?
Receive it.
Well they receive it pretty well actually. They think it's a really sort of unusual thing. I guess with a lot of curiosity.
You know it's not that common a thing to get a novel published and people are generally very curious about it.
My advisor reacted by saying well at least you should have no problem writing your thesis. And that was perhaps a bit of an overreaction because it's quite a different thing to write a thesis than write a novel.
Any advice for beginning writers? What would you tell people just starting out?
Well the most important thing in writing is to be distinctive. And by that I don't mean outrageous necessarily.
But to find whatever you have that is unique in your experience and at every step of your writing to try to write something that hasn't been written before.
I think people don't understand how important that aspect of writing is. That what sounds believable and real often is because it is so utterly imaginative.
And because the reader simply has never thought of it quite that way before and therefore can't think that it's unreal.
And that's what I've seen from the writer's workshop and from the things by young writers by starting out writers that do get published.
The second thing I would say is you just have to keep submitting what you write because now I was very fortunate that the first publisher I sent my novel to happened to have an editor who really liked the idea and was taking with it.
That's an unusual thing. Agatha Christie took eleven tries to get her first book published. And there are all sorts of stories like that.
So I would say those are the two main things. Try to be, to say the ordinary in a distinctive way to write originally and whatever you write just keep submitting it for publication.
OK, that's the end of my list. We appreciate your consenting to interview.